My name is James Scofield.
And I'm a Senior Data Scientist at Kaluza, which was formerly
part of OVO Energy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Kaluza's mission statement is to securely connect all devices
to a low-carbon electric power system.
Now, this mission statement probably
needs unpacking a bit and some context,
because it doesn't make much sense on its own.
So for the non-power system engineers out there,
the one thing you need to know about the electric power system
is that supply and demand have to be
balanced equal to each other at all points in time.
The way that's historically been done
is that we've used the supply side to follow the demand side.
So that means we've turned on more power plants
or turned some up when the demand is increasing and turned
them off or turned some down when the demand is decreasing,
which has been fine, because we can control fossil fuel
generation.
However, as we're moving to our low-carbon future,
we will have to incorporate renewable energy, which--
for example, wind or solar--
which we can't control.
And if we can't control the supply side,
we're going to have to balance the system by involving
the demand side, which is where we come in.
Now, this problem has also been exacerbated
by the uptake of electric vehicles, which
is going to massively increase the peak to average use
of the power system and, again, to necessitate massive, very
expensive upgrades in the infrastructure
in order to incorporate them, unless we start
doing some smart charging.
And smart charging here means spreading that peak
around the day, but still delivering the service
that people want from their electric vehicles.
So that might mean for you, if you have one,
you get home from work, you plug it in, and you say,
I just need this car charged by 7 AM in the morning,
and then leave it to us.
We'll sort out the optimal charging schedule
which will deliver a full battery of energy for you
at the lowest possible cost, which will also
be good for the power system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A typical day would start with stand-up
in the morning, which is when the whole team stands up
together, just for five minutes.
Everyone very quickly mentions what they did the previous day
and what they plan to do this day.
It's also when any risks, blockers, issues
can get mentioned and ideally unblocked so that people
can continue with their work.
And this is quite a nice way to keep a view on what
the rest of the team is doing.
The actual work of the day is typically coding.
So that could either be data analysis or developing the code
for a data-driven application.
And also, for the data scientist meetings
with stakeholders to understand what people want--
these regular check-ins are very important.
But it's also important to balance the development
time against the meeting time.
And ideally, we want to have a bit more development time
than meeting time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'll tell you an anecdote first.
When I started doing my PhD in 2011 with Professor Goran
Strbac over in the EEE department at Imperial,
one thing that he drilled into all of his students
was, the value of anything can only
be compared to the cost of the alternative.
And that's absolutely true for data science, as well.
Whenever we start a new project, the first thing
that we need to do is to benchmark where we are,
which means we look at the current situation
and we find or design a metric to measure
the value of that current situation
or the cost of that current situation.
Then we perform whatever work we're
going to do in this project.
And we re-run that metric on the new situation.
So let's say it's a predictor.
The incumbent would be--
let's say you're getting an accuracy of 70%.
And after a week's worth of work on a new predictor,
you're getting an accuracy of 75%.
Well, that's still not value.
But we need to convert that additional 5% inaccuracy
into a financial term that's the value for the business.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Moonshots are quite often what all data scientists want to do.
The reality is that it's not easy to do them
unless the business has some slack--
i.e.
time that developers can put into these moonshots
and, more importantly, time that the business has already
accepted it might lose without any return.
Now, choosing those moonshots is the same as choosing anything.
You first of all have to understand,
what is the value proposition if it works?
And for a moonshot, because the chance of failure
is obviously quite high, that value
also has to be quite high, because the probability
of success times the value is what you're
going to get in expectation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To convey value to non-technical stakeholders
or decision-makers, it's absolutely crucial
to use language that they understand.
So stick to the very concise value statement
in plain English, or at least the domain language
that you use in the business.
And also, explain the assumptions you made,
because not all of your assumptions might be correct.
Explain to the stakeholder where you
think there's a chance some of your assumptions might be wrong
and what the impact of those assumptions being wrong
might be, because ultimately, they have to make the call.
I've found that being absolutely clear on potentially getting
stuff wrong has never been a negative in my relationship
with stakeholders.
And they've always appreciated the candour of explaining
errors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Kaluza, our product is controlling
real, physical assets.
So everything we do is related to physical devices
or infrastructure.
And it's not just infrastructure,
but it's also critical infrastructure,
because we're dealing with things
that are affecting the smooth functioning of the power
system.
So obviously, for us, security is our number one concern.
And we devote a lot of our resources
to making sure we have world-class security
on our system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As for the data that we deal with, of course,
you can tell an awful lot from someone's energy consumption
profile--
the most obvious thing being when they're home.
So it's absolutely critical to make sure
that the personal details, or PII in GDPR lingo,
are kept very separately from the telemetry
that we're getting from devices.
The way we do that and the way we've always
done that, even prior to GDPR, is that we
build in privacy by design.
And that can be, for example, keeping
all of the PII data, or Personally
Identifiable Information data, in a completely separate
database with a linking table to the telemetry.
That way, if we ever need to remove someone from the system,
it's just a case of deleting the linking table.
And there will be no link at all between the PII
and the telemetry we're taking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Kaluza, our whole business is IOT.
So from the get-go, we're dealing with devices.
Now, one thing you need to know about devices
is that they run firmware.
Firmware is typically coded in a low-level language,
like C or C++.
And the devices are running at the end of a potentially low
bandwidth connection.
So one thing that comes out of this
is that you can only update the software very infrequently.
And it's always actually quite high-risk when you update it,
because if the update doesn't go smoothly,
you have to send a person out to try and fix it.
The way to manage this risk is, you
have to define upfront, and very clearly, the interface
and the functionality that you need this firmware to provide
with the rest of your system.
And ideally, you need to get it right in the first time
or, if not the first time, at least
the second time, because it's very expensive to update it.
Lastly, I'd say, always check assumptions.
Physical devices often come with data sheets
which will tell you how they're going
to behave under perfect physical conditions,
or at least ideal conditions.
Reality is seldom ideal.
And you're often going to see a device behaving in a way
that you didn't expect.
Finding this before you deploy into production
or before you release a product is absolutely golden.
And the only way to do that is to get your hands
on some physical devices and play around with them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When did I realise I wanted to become a data scientist?
Well, it's a bit of a funny story for me,
because I accidentally became a data scientist when someone
invented the word "data science,"
and I realised that that's what I was doing.
I think this was sometime in 2011.
And if you're interested, you can look at Google Trends
and see when the term "data science" suddenly picked up
in popularity, which is roughly when all businesses started
wanting data scientists.
It was very useful for me and very fortuitous for me.
I guess I was very lucky with that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Off the top of my head, I'd say I
can think of three things that are misconceptions for people
who are starting out in data science
or for people who are outside of data science, looking in.
The first is that it's all AI and highly complex.
This just isn't true.
Most of the solutions that we create are very simple.
A high school student would probably
be able to understand the mathematics of them.
But they do the job.
And they were able to be delivered quickly.
And therefore, they deliver more value
than the more complex solution.
The second misconception I've often come across
is how long stuff takes.
Now, I've got a rule of thumb for this.
I try to imagine how long the job would take
if everything went perfectly.
So that's with, all of my assumptions
are correct, everything works fine,
I didn't have any code issues.
And then once I have an estimate for the perfect time,
I multiply that by three.
The third misconception I quite often see
is what people expect to spend most of their time doing.
Now, the sad truth of data science
is, you need data, which means that most of your time
is spent accessing data, transforming data, and cleaning
data to get it into the right shape
to use in whatever algorithm you're developing.
And the typical time split, at least at entry level,
I would say, is about 70/30.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For people starting out in data science today,
I'd probably give two pieces of advice.
One, focus on the basics.
So that's your probability theory, regression analysis,
because most of what you do is going
to be the simple stuff delivered fast--
the low-hanging fruit in the business, basically.
And the other thing is, do invest some time
in developing your coding ability.
You're going to be working in a team.
Your team will thank you for writing clean code.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My advice for someone wanting to get into energy analytics
is to really prioritise networking.
Go to meet-up events.
Use your contacts-- maybe it's alumni contacts.
If anyone is interested, I'm very
happy to speak to you about what we do.
And finally, show your enthusiasm for the area.
We love to hire enthusiastic people.
And in fact, I might even go as far
as saying we don't ever really hire
people who aren't enthusiastic for the vision and the product
that we're creating.
